Hillary Clinton: After Orlando, We Can’t Demonize Muslim People
“We have to stand together. Be proud together. There is no better rebuke to the terrorists.”
headshot
By Nick Visser
Presumptive Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton says it's important not to&nbsp;demonize Muslim people over terrorist acts lik
JUSTIN SULLIVAN VIA GETTY IMAGES
Presumptive Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton says it’s important not to demonize Muslim people over terrorist acts like the Orlando massacre.
Hillary Clinton called for tolerance in the wake of the Orlando massacre, as she urged Americans to “stand together” to thwart terrorists and avoid demonizing a religion that 1.6 billion people practice.

The presumptive Democratic nominee’s moving tribute on Facebook late Monday to the 49 people killed in Sunday’s mass shooting was in stark contrast to Donald Trump, who once again proposed a sweepingly anti-Muslim border policy.

While Clinton touched on her renewed calls for gun control, the message focused on the need for acceptance and the ongoing affirmation of rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Americans.

“I want to say this to all the LGBT people grieving today in Florida and across our country: You have millions of allies who will always have your back,” she wrote. “We have to stand together. Be proud together. There is no better rebuke to the terrorists and all those who hate.”

The former Secretary of State urged readers to stray away from retaliatory, Islamophobic acts that have emerged after acts of mass terrorism. Crime statistics show that hate crimes tripled after attacks in Paris and San Bernardino.

“Here’s what we absolutely cannot do: We cannot demonize Muslim people,” the message reads. “Inflammatory anti-Muslim rhetoric hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror.”

Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, has seemed to preach the opposite. On Monday, he proposed punishing Americans who don’t report suspicious activity from their friends and neighbors and warned that “Radical Islam is coming to our shores.”