Legal Experts Explode Over Donald Trump’s ‘Despicable’ 2020 Bombshell
“This is an open invitation to foreign governments to commit crimes to re-elect Trump.”
headshot
Legal analysts, attorneys and former prosecutors have joined the growing chorus of criticism of Donald Trump after the president confessed on national TV that he’d willfully receive dirt on his 2020 rivals from foreign powers ― and perhaps not inform the FBI about it.

Trump’s astonishing admission in an interview with ABC News’ George Stephanopoulos was described as “despicable” by Walter Shaub, the former head of the U.S. Office of Government Ethics.

Shaub, who served under Trump for six months until his resignation in July 2017, last week published an extensive list of bad signs from the Trump administration.

Conservative attorney George Conway, who despite his marriage to White House counselor Kellyanne Conway has repeatedly clashed with Trump and on Wednesday repeated his call for his impeachment, said it proved how Trump was “not fit to hold any office,” public or private.

Not fit to hold any office of public trust.  Not fit to hold any position of private trust.  Not fit to hold any position that requires him to put someone else’s interests above his own.  That’s because, among other things, he’s a pathological narcissist. https://twitter.com/neal_katyal/status/1138964504622977024 …

Twitter Ads info and privacy
12.2K people are talking about this
Former prosecutor Mimi Rocah laid the blame with the GOP, writing that “Republicans have sanctioned this by their silence.”
We’ve gone from “it was about adoptions,” to “no collusion,” to “collusion is just fine.” Republicans have sanctioned this by their silence. And Democrats will be enablers if they don’t take more drastic action now. https://twitter.com/evanmcmurry/status/1138936855435591681 …
res. Trump tells @GStephanopoulos he wouldn't necessarily alert the FBI if approached by foreign figures with information on his 2020 opponent: "It’s not an interference. They have information. I think I’d take it." https://abcn.ws/2R8UZp2 

7,237 people are talking about this
And Elie Honig, also a former prosecutor, speculated that “if this isn’t ‘collusion’ then what exactly would collusion be?”

If this isn’t “collusion” then what exactly would collusion be? https://twitter.com/evanmcmurry/status/1138936855435591681 …

EXCLUSIVE: Pres. Trump tells @GStephanopoulos he wouldn't necessarily alert the FBI if approached by foreign figures with information on his 2020 opponent: "It’s not an interference. They have information. I think I’d take it." https://abcn.ws/2R8UZp2 

Embedded video

Other experts suggested Trump had just issued “an open invitation to foreign governments to commit crimes” to get him reelected, demonstrated “how you can have collusion without a conspiracy” and proven how he was “disloyal to the nation.”

