Donald Trump: If The Economy Is Gonna Explode, Let It Happen Quickly
He doesn’t want a Trump presidency to take the blame.
headshot
By Ryan Grim

WASHINGTON ― If there’s going to be a financial crisis, Donald Trump wants it to happen sooner rather than later, so that a potential Trump presidency doesn’t take the blame, he said in remarks at a rally earlier this year that were overlooked at the time. 

The GOP nominee, speaking in Salt Lake City in March, warned that high interest rates and “everything else” was bound to lead to a financial explosion. Let it happen quickly, he pleaded. 

“We’re sitting on a bubble like you’ve never seen and I hope it doesn’t explode when I’m president. If it’s going to explode let it be a couple of days early. You know, I’ll be in there two weeks, the bubble explodes, they’ll say ‘Oh, it’s Trump’s fault.’  Na, I don’t want that,” he said.

Trump, who is first an entertainer and second a politician, is often not serious about what he says. He has recently created firestorm after firestorm only to later say that he was joking. He was kidding when he suggested Russia should find Hillary Clinton’s missing 30,000 emails and release them. He was being sarcastic when he said President Barack Obama and Clinton co-founded ISIS. And he was (sort of?) joking about “Second Amendment people” assassinating his opponent. 

He is, however, serious about not wanting a crisis on his watch, though his performance in the campaign has likely spared him from any possibility of becoming president. 

“We are sitting on a bubble and it’s a very dangerous bubble right now. You take a look, with what they’re doing with interest rates, we have free money, everything else,” he said in March. “We’re sitting on a big fat ugly bubble, at some point, unless we act quickly and smartly, it’s going to explode.”

But Trump, as concerned as he is about a crisis, is less concerned about winning. At a rally in May, he assured supporters that he didn’t care if he wins or not. “My attitude is, I don’t care, I don’t care. If we’re not going to do it right, I don’t care. I’ll go and I’ll, you know, live it out, I’ll build buildings, and I’ll have some fun and I’ll kick the bucket. That’ll be the end. I’ll be just fine. You understand. I don’t care. We’re going to do it right, folks. We’re going to do it right,” Trump promised.